Wynne spotted the  figure on the distant hillside, hair swathed in shadow but its features clear. He was tall, not tall enough for the hill but not too short either. His beard was white and fine. He was clad in a leather-bound loincloth, his skin shining as he looked down into the valley. The figure watched him with two sets of bright white eyes that spoke of unknown intensity.

'You look to be in one of those old Faraway places, Mr Thranduil. The next time you are, where will you stay?'

Wynne looked toward the valley. All was quiet and still. 'I prefer for others to take the trouble to prepare me, my father always did.' He drew his hand across his forehead. 'You'd better not. I'll be fine.'

'You shall be fine. Mr Thranduil, do not attempt to take me, for I shall be stronger than you.'

Wynne was silent for a moment, stunned by this blunt demonstration of his father's power. 'I apologise, I'm not your foe.'

'I take it from your look that you must know the truth, my child. I shall be your foe if you try.'

The third time he had visited him in Rohan he had slept on his grave for three nights and three days. It seemed he did not know what would happen after that; Thranduil may be Gandalf's father, but he is also what's called a Wise Man. It is rather like calling Morgana a Yule Goddess. Just as Morgana is a better firebrand than Eragon, so it is with Thranduil. Some foolishness, perhaps, or most foolishness; in any event, without his counsel the Wheel did not turn. The Man Who Met Himself spoke his own name from the Halls of Mandos; from the Halls of Mandos he spoke to Icthlarin that old hag who lived in the deep seas. Icthlarin seemed not to understand his words, but the natural interpretation, at least to an unbiassed mind, must be that Icthlarin was displeased and wondered why he had not been welcomed. And, if he were in Merlin's shoes and asked the question in these terms, why he had not been welcomed, well, it was all the same to him. A man did not judge his time by its worth.


*****

He was given the last of the silver and, in his little chamber, the last red cloak which he might wear. This cloak was torn, but not so badly as his other clothes. And it was explained to him that he would never wear a thing in Rohan which the King of Men, or any other Númenórean, would not be able to afford. So the red cloak was given to the scribe with the silver.

That left the Moon-shine Cloak. The man who had woven the long braid said: 'I am not sure how you wish to do that; perhaps you shall, perhaps you shall not. It must not be done fast. One night is much too long for someone who came out of the sea, and you shall sleep here if you can. You must call upon the Moon to help you and take in one piece of its substance.'

The Moon-shine Cloak was the first cloak he wore and it came to him with no haste. The silver wound around his waist and above his chest like two ripples of a snake. The silver stretched tight like a net around his neck, his shoulders, and his back. In the middle of the leathery net he put the glass of the obsidian. As the Silver set, it seemed as if the Cloak itself had been sewn on. The red cloth had been blackened by the sun, but the silvery clothes of old lent a night-silken feel to them. He put them on very soon after the golden braid on the braid was done, for the Moon-shine Cloak was a great comfort to the beast who wore it.

And then the Silver went to him, and, when the golden braid was done, he got up and went out into the twilight of the night, out into the green country of the Shire. Before the unhewn walls of its doors shone green pools and hills, and down under the lapping water rang the songs of the evening birds. And he went out into the twilight, and there he saw the shadows of the Shire growing low behind him. He moved on as quickly as the moon turned, hoping he would see the gateways of Hithlum, or Erebor.

"I came out upon the dark of the second night, and far out I went, and I did not come back until the first day of the third week in the month of autumn," he said to himself. "And then I found that the Queen of the Forest had sailed away from Hobbiton."

From this he could see that all those mysterious people from the East had truly crossed the seas to seek their fortunes, and he had scarcely time to look back when he heard the tinkling of glittering metal at the door. "O golden door of the Shire!" he cried. "Welcome! Welcome to your kingdom! Come, and I will show you the treasures of the earth!" He called out to the Moonlight Cloak, saying: "Come, and let us take our leave of one another! The glittering gold of this land, the glittering silver of Erebor, the glittering crystal of Rohan!"

But the Moonlight Cloak did not answer him. He looked about him in his anxious haste for the cloak. There was only the silvery shimmer, the stone, and the strangely-worked cloth, and a haze of clothy greyness in the cold light of a mid-day sun.

"No shadow of you, Moonlight Cloak," he said, with surprise. "For I thought that you had arrived here of your own accord. You had not told me that you had crossed the sea to go to my city."

"I had another reason, Dark Lord," said the Cloak, "and it was not your heart that was cold."

The dark cloak felt pity for him, and said: "Forgive me, my lord. I have known that you were travelling, and that you would come here. But I would not have you to see my city, and therefore I have not yet sent you my gifts, for I was afraid you might be sickened by the treasures of the Shire.

"But before I leave you, you have one great favour to ask. Would you not like to buy, at a dear price, the Moon in the North? I have no owner of my own, and would gladly sell it at your price. It is the very jewel of Gondor, the one with the crown upon its head, and the one that shows the way from the realms of the dead to the waking world. You shall have it, or you shall have nothing. Be not daunted, my lord, though my kindness is but small compared to your gifts. I have no need of aid. I have been faithful to you all my life."

"I thank you, for that," said Frodo. "And you, too, shall have the seven silver pieces."

"The seven silver pieces," said the Cloak, "is worth more than I had been to aught I owned. Then you will go to the Shire, and have a market for your gifts, and your thanks. And I will offer you a journey to Rivendell, and may that be the reward of your gratitude for your friendship."

Then Frodo left him, and the Three clad him in the Red Ring that they had taken from Aragorn, and he took the One Ring from the hand of the Elf-king, and removed it from his left hand, and it was changed into the Silvery Ring that Eomer gave him. With it he came to the land of Mordor, and there was set up by the fires the great fortress of the Witch-king. And the Gate of Mordor was open, and Frodo passed through it and was come into the place of the Tower of Orthanc.

Frodo was at first strangely awed by the large grey hall and wall, with its high turrets, and the windows of cut stones, and the huge carved gates that opened on all sides. But as he began to go down a large paved stone stepped from one of the lofty walls, and he was at once driven to make the shortest way possible to the Tower, because of the great number of guards; and at once he found the door of the great hall, a great window in which he could see the backs of the great garrison. He did not know that a man, on whom he was alone and under guard, might enter through a window; but in any case he made his way into the great hall, and it was full of Elves. They greeted him most graciously, and he was told that it was a day of celebration for the hall. He learned from them, after they had called upon him, that he must be given the Helm of Orthanc.

There was still another sound in the hall, a clanking of small bells, and he heard a loud voice that demanded him. His heart began to beat fast in his chest, and he found that he was no longer in the great hall, but he was at the King's gates. Far up the battlements he saw great heavy shields resting, against the walls of the castle, and he noticed that they were painted a pale green, and that the colours were still dark. Around the shields were scores of square bucklers of gold, while shields with hearts on their backs were moving through the air. He now made his way to the centre of the city, and far up in the sky he saw one of the green shields, that hung of mighty pine-needles at the battlements, that for a long time had been closed, never a song being sung to it.

In the centre of the great gates were men, and they, or the Bell-bearers who rode by, were already singing. He asked the one who led them whether it was wise to disturb the King's spirit when he was in this life.

"It will be said that we have failed in the Lord's work. Shall I then, to prove to those who do not know what to do when the King's work is over, maintain the odious semblance of a king, after he has proved himself dead to them, only to take their sons, that they may ask him to come to life again, and repeat the duty which we have been unwilling to do for him?" said the Bell-bearer. "All that we have to say is for him who is called to bear the Lord's service. It is not to hold back a little, but to overcome fear and to give of our all. You will, our lord King of the Earth, fight and win with your own sword, and the skills of the yeomen and knights, and we will not say 'he wins by right'—no, that is the false glory of our old days, that all in their fortunes are won by 'right.' What, pray, would you say, if all this brought you dishonour? I have had cause to do nothing which I know to be against the right, and to the love of the Lord! And yet, might I see the evil I have done, should be enough to make me change my ways! This I say with real tears: May there be a day when this will be evident! What shall I do if evil be done? Shall I lay it on my soul, and continue to think and to feel as I have ever done?"

But the king's words made his heart change. It seemed to him that he must keep faith with these men; but what would they say if he had broken faith with them? And at that the king spoke: "By the gods, thank you!" said he, "I have changed my mind. I have no need to say more, but you will do for me as you have done to this great price."

"By the gods!" said the Bell-bearer. "Then we shall see," said he, "if this is no falsehood, or whether it may truly be so. These words, and the oath which they have sworn, look and sound like falsehood. But they could not leave us now, without being guilty of a crime; for we cannot but think that the grace of the Lord is greater than their own evil. So I shall take my flight before them, and go away from this place. If I am unable to kill them, but must die, then will my fellows bless me, for they know the power of the Lord over men. But if I am spared, will the Lord be wroth with me, and mock me because I know nothing?"

But the king made no answer, though he said one word; and the Bell-bearer went down into the black dark, and sat trembling there in his house, till he had got back to his ships. And when the sea-wolves returned, and tore the ships to pieces with their teeth, the folk of the Painted Hall came down into the water, and laid them all in his churchyard.

And all night long there were dead sea-wolves all over the islands, and all night long the woods were alive with blood. And even to this day the bloody sea-wolves are still known in certain parts, like ogres in Middle-earth; and it is whispered that those who see them should be wise men in the world. And the people of that country are fain to believe it, and always they call them devils, and make a great cry about them.
